---
date: 2022-11-27
cover:
  path: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1542500186-6edb30855637?ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8&auto=format&fit=crop
  credit: unknown
external: false
title: Things I Wish I Knew Before Learning Software Engineering
description: Becoming a software engineer can be daunting, here are things I wish I knew before I started.
---

Becoming a software engineer is a fantastic way to use your creativity and
technical skills to build amazing things that improves people's lives. But it's
not always an easy road, and a lack of guidance can often make the process
hideous and getting started daunting. Here are things I wish I had known before
learning software engineering.

# Define your reason

Having a well-defined reason in mind when learning software engineering can help
through the rough parts of it. This reason can be money, especially that
software engineering does not require a degree.

Your reason may be a passion, which is my reason. I chose software engineering
because it appealed to me at a young age. I wrote [an article][1] about it.

These are not all there is, though! Some people learn to code because they can
use it to automate tedious processes in their everyday life. It can also aid you
in understanding the software engineers you work with, even if you are not in a
technical role.

The sky is the limit. What matters is a well-defined reason to make the journey
worth it.

# You are not your code

Our lives as software engineers consist mainly of learning. We start by writing
dirty code and improve over time. We discover better ways to build the things we
do.

Your code will be shit on. Others will completely dismiss it as useless,
unclean, or any other reason which will often be valid. But we are not machines.
We are human beings. We grow attached to the things we build and the code we
write.

You can gradually learn to detach yourself from your code, however. Start by
having colleagues, friends, or mentors review your code regularly. The role of
code review is to make sure committed code is _okay_ per a standard before it
can be merged into the final product. A reviewer usually sees things that code
writers do not see, such as misspellings, inconsistent code style, and logic
errors.

The best way to benefit from code review if you can not find a trusted reviewer
is to review it yourself the following day. This allows you to see things you do
not notice when writing the code, and encourages you to develop the habit of
self-reviewing. This will improve your code quality over time.

# Learn to digest criticism

Criticism is not always going to be objective. And it is not always going to be
helpful, even if objective. It may have been delivered in bad faith or by an
inexperienced person. Learning to digest criticism will positively impact your
learning journey.

Information and motives affect criticism. These motives can be malicious, and
taking every criticism as valuable and informed may mislead you into destroying
a perfectly sound idea.

Ask yourself when faced with criticism. Is the person giving it genuinely
interested in helping? Are their opinions informed? What experience do they
have? Does it make sense? These are some of the questions I ask myself, and I
always get a clearer picture of whether I should consider said criticism
valuable.

# Find your niche

A niche is a speciality in which you prefer spending your time. We enjoy our
niches more than anything else. And we are usually happy spending more time
doing what we love the most.

For example, my favourite topics are performance and user experience. And I can
safely say that I spend most of my time working in these two areas. I assign
myself tasks related to these topics at work and usually the first to discover
issues on them.

The possibilities are infinite when finding your niche, and you usually do not
search for them. They are just things you enjoy the most about your job. But
once you do find a niche, your perspective shifts entirely.

# Avoid bad habits early

Beginners often ignore best practices like code formatting and planning, even
though these skills are essential to everything we do. Learn code quality
practices and standards early. Learn to use linters and automated code
formatters for your language of choice.

There are different code quality and style standards for every programming
language. For example, Python has PEP 8, and JavaScript has Airbnb, Google, and
Standard. These are not all there is, but they are common enough to be used
comfortably.

Learn clean code principles, code smells, design principles, technical debt, and
refactoring. [Refactoring.Guru][2] is an amazing start.
It dives into the details of code smells, how to handle technical debt, what and
when to refactor, and the design patterns we use.

# Escape tutorial purgatory

Going from one tutorial to another without actually planning and building
projects on your own has more negative side effects on your knowledge than
actually following those tutorials.

Take a break from courses, tutorials, and other walkthrough material and start
building side projects. This will teach you a lot more than following a tutorial
blindly.

Get stuck? Search online. Still stuck? Find someone to help you. There are
platforms that specialize in providing help through a question-answer system,
such as Stackoverflow. You can also find help on channels used by the
maintainers of the tools you use, such as GitHub Discussions.

# Plan and document your side projects

Planned projects tempt you to put more effort and complete them. Spend some time
planning instead of jumping straight into coding a project. Planning will not
only encourage you to work on a project, but will also help you understand it
more, have a clearer picture of the project requirements, and have a better
overview of the project's potential timeline.

This allows you to set realistic expectations, deadlines, and timelines.
Learning an agile framework can help you adapt to changes in your daily routine
and will allow you to better plan your projects based on point estimates,
previous projects, and previous iterations of work on a project.

Documentation is your only source of truth after the source code. Document your
planning, requirements, and your estimates. Documentation will come in handy
when you maintain a project months after completing it and when onboarding
others.

# Find a mentor

A mentor is someone who can guide you through your journey. They provide
_informed_ insight and help you with decision-making.

A mentor may be an experienced friend whose judgement you trust, a colleague, or
even a stranger. As long as they have legitimate experience and can actually
assist you. Some mentors provide their services for an hourly fee, and some
others completely free of charge.

[Coding Coach][3] is a free, open-source platform that
aims to connect software developers and mentors around the world. It is a great
platform built by developers for developers.

# Have patience

Learning software engineering can become difficult at times. Forcing yourself
beyond your limits can make the journey orders of magnitude more tedious. Give
yourself time to learn, practice, and process what you go through.

Use mind maps, summaries, and other forms of complementary tools to aid you in
remembering what you learn. Some people learn by reading stuff once, while
others take a couple times and a lot of practice before fully understanding a
topic.

Understand how your brain processes stuff, and go at your own pace. You're not
in a race, and cutting corners to "catch up" will only hurt your potential
opportunities.

# Create a social presence

A social presence can improve your opportunities. It can also guarantee you more
experienced mentors. However, how you build a social presence can differ from
one person to another.

You can create content for beginners, mentor people, be active in social groups,
attend events, or join communities. Do not just join and be invisible in a
community, though! Interact and connect with others to put yourself out there.

Increasing your connections network will definitely have a positive impact on
your opportunities as well, either directly or through referrals. Social
networks, student activities, and Meetup groups can help you connect to people
working in the same field as you are.

And this can introduce you to better mentors, more experienced developers, and
more desirable job opportunities. Your interpersonal skills matter, and the
better they are, the better your overall experience will be.

# Conclusion

There is a lot to learn in software engineering. It can be overwhelming at
times. However, if you take the time to master the basics and build a strong
foundation, you will be well on your way to success in this field. I wish I had
known these things before I started learning software engineering, but I'm glad
I know them now. If you're starting out, keep these things in mind, and you'll
be sure to set yourself up for a fun journey!

Want more tips to help you learn to code? I wrote an article about that on
[dev.to][4]. If you
liked this article, can you share it with someone else learning to code? I wish
I knew all of this when I was starting, and I hope it helped you too. Thank you
for reading!

[1]: https://iamnabil.netlify.app/arabic/2020-07-14-journey-in-programming-world
[2]: https://refactoring.guru/
[3]: https://codingcoach.io/
[4]: https://dev.to/kl13nt/things-that-helped-me-learn-to-code-40je
